Specification reference: [[AQA Physics Specification#5.1.1 Basics of electricity|5.1.1 Basics of electricity]]

An electrical circuit requires a conductor through which current can flow, and a source of potential difference.

### Current
>[!QUOTE] The electric current is the rate of flow of charge in the wire or component.

- It is due to the passage of charged particles, referred to as charge carriers. In metals, these are electrons ($e^{-}$)

>[!INFO] Conventions :(
>The convention for the direction of current in a circuit is from positive (+) to negative (-). However, in reality, electrons leave from the negative terminal as they are attracted and move towards the positive terminal of a battery

Current can be described with the following equation:
$$
I = \frac{\Delta Q}{\Delta t}
$$
where $I$ is current (measured in amperes, A), $\Delta Q$ is the charge flow (measured in coulombs, C) and $\Delta t$ is the time elapsed (s).

Current can be measured using an ammeter. Ammeters must be connected in series with the component being measured.

A single electron has the charge of $1.6 \times 10^{-19}$ C, which is equal to one [[1.1 Use of SI units and their prefixes#Electron volt (eV)|electron-volt]] divided by 1 volt ($E=\frac{Q}{V}$).

### Potential difference
A battery has the **potential** to transfer energy from its chemical store to electrons which deliver energy to the torch bulb. Each electron moves around the circuit and takes a fixed amount of energy from the battery as it passes through and passes it through a circuit.

The potential difference, or voltage, is the energy transferred per unit charge as the charge moves through a component or circuit. It is the *fixed amount of energy* taken by the electrons. The energy per unit charge taken up is known as the [[5.1.6 Electromotive force and internal resistance|electromotive force]].

>[!quote] Potential difference is defined as the work done per unit charge

Potential difference can be described using the following equation:
$$
V =\frac{W}{Q}
$$
where $V$ is potential difference (measured in volts, V), $W$ is the work done (measured in joules, J) and $Q$ is the charge flow (measured in coulombs, C).

Potential difference is measured using a voltmeter. Voltmeter must be set up in parallel with the component being measured.

>[!info] How are potential differences made?
>A simple cell creates a potential difference through the separation of charge. One end (terminal) has an excess of positive charge and the other an excess of negative charge.
### Resistance
Resistance is defined as the opposition of a component to the flow of electric current through it. It is described using the following equation:
$$
R = \frac{V}{I}
$$
where $R$ is resistance (measured in ohms, $\Omega$), $V$ is potential difference (measured in volts, V) and $I$ is current (measured in amperes, A).

For a given potential difference:
- the higher the resistance, the lower the current that can flow
- the lower the resistance, the higher the current that can flow